Alright, so I wanted to start actually by taking you back to when you were a young kid growing up. How would you describe what life was like growing up? Life was pretty simple actually. I remember, since the time I can remember things, I remember always wanting to play cricket, just hold a cricket bat and just hit balls. So, yeah, that's my earliest memory of knowing that I want to do this as a profession and slowly in time I asked my father one day to, because I used to go and play in the park regularly and then I was able to watch games on TV and then copy exactly the things that were happening on TV, like the professionals did. And then my friends told me, you know, you're pretty good. I mean, really do learn this and I used to tell them I saw it on TV yesterday and I thought I'll try it here and I used to execute it properly. So, we grew up in a housing society and people who always together, always, you know, friends spending time with each other. Just being kids really, you know, just having fun in life and just enjoying life every day and it was a beautiful time. How would you describe the rented house that you grew up in? I think it was around, when I was 13 or maybe 14 years old when we started staying on rent. And I remember that because my brother wanted to set up a business and, you know, we had to sort of get the finances going and we didn't have anything. So, we had to get rid of our house and, you know, put in money into the business and stay on rent from there and then the business boomed and then it collapsed and, you know, the situation became really difficult. So, yeah, those early years of me getting to play for the state team, which is the Delhi team, in age group cricket. So, we have what do you call under 15 level, then they under 17s, then they under 19. So, all that time we were staying on our rented place and I, it's actually a very tricky time to remember because you're not really sure whether you're going to make it professionally or not. You suddenly realize the competition that's around you and you have to all perform everyone and then there's so many other factors when you're growing up and you're wanting to play eventually for your country. So, yeah, that was a tough time. I mean, we didn't have the resources that we would have expected to as a family and... What led to the business collapsing? It was a combination of a lot of things, you know, few people who, who we trusted, sort of breaking your trust. That's the reason why most things failed because you trust people and then they betray you of sorts. And then the recovery was very difficult because you take a lot of effort and time to set up something and then it collapses and then you don't have the resources to reestablish anything again. So, I remember that that time being very volatile. It was something that all of us felt was very tough to be able to find resources. What do you think was the hardest part of going through that? The hardest part was I lost my father as well. I was 17 just around 18 and I was playing my first year of first-class cricket. So, first-class cricket in India is the highest level of state cricket. And after that you start playing for your second-level Indian team and then eventually the Indian team. So, I was at that level and it was my breakthrough year and that's when my father passed away. So, I think that was like everything's going bad and that for us was the worst part of it all. I want to ask you about your parents and there's a funny moment involving your dad as well. But what do you think you learned from your folks? What I learned from my dad was as you can understand in junior-level cricket and coming up in any institution you have a lot of things happening around selection. And people being favored and doing the wrong things and you know it's a lot of manipulation happens in terms of the important people getting their way and stuff like that. So, we face that as well and there were many instances when I was growing up and literally my father was told that if you want your child selected or something like that, you'll have to do a few things to get him there. Meaning, you know doing a few favors for people or just entertaining people for the sake of it and stuff like that and he was a self-made man and he thought, no this is not the right thing to do. I'm not going to entertain someone just so that my son can play state cricket. If he is good enough, he's going to make it on his ability and if not, so be it. And because you are so strong and self-made, that taught me a lot of things because had he chosen the wrong path for me, I would have become a guy who looks for excuses because you learn everything from looking at what your parents do and the example they said. So, I would have become a guy who looks for excuses maybe could never reach the highest level. So, what that taught me was to just believe in yourself, believe in your performances and that's the only thing that will always speak for you. So, those were the most important teachings for me growing up to see the right thing happening in front of my eyes and purely because we didn't also have the resources to do anything which was outrageous or extravagant that taught you the values of life. You're 12 years old. Tell about when your father accidentally abandoned you when you're quite shopping on Independence Day. So, my father was, as I said, self-made man and he was very particular about rules and regulations and for some reason I forgot to get my helmet to sit at the back of the scooter that we used to have. So, he had his helmet on and it was a Sunday and I actually half way he realized that I don't have the helmet on and I told him it's fine, it's a Sunday, no one's going to be there on the streets, no one's going to catch us and I was just being stupid, I was just being excited to just get out of the house and get those kites because that's a big festival in North India, the Independence Day is celebrated by flying kites and that's sort of thing. So, it's huge and I was so excited to just get my stuff and he took me there. So, on the way back we saw a shop where people were selling fruits and I love watermelons. So, I told him I want a watermelon and they were big, like nice green watermelons there and the guy cut it, we tasted it, everything, okay this is the one we're getting and by the time I came out I had the bag and they used to be a hook in front of the scooter. So, I went to put the watermelon on the hook and I don't know what happened by that time, a couple of traffic police guys were walking towards us and they were randomly just walking on the street, right? They didn't even notice that I have a helmet or the scooter was parked and for some reason he panicked, he thought they were coming to catch us and he thought I'm on the scooter already and before I could get on the back he just rode off and I'm standing there. And I'm standing there on the road looking at him just going away and I'm thinking I'm shouting and the helmet used to have, you know used to cover your ears back then. So, he couldn't hear me and because the sound is scooter as well he just went off and he didn't come back for 10 minutes and I'm thinking what the hell is going on? And then I took another mode of transport to go back home, we call those things, rickshaws here like a cycle kind of a thing and then I'm sitting on one of those. So, apparently he went back home and he asked my mother where I am and she's like what do you mean where I am? You know you took him with you, you should know where he is. So, then he came back looking for me and I was on this thing going back and he shouting from across the road, shouting my name and I just turned my head in front of him and I kept ignoring him and I was like how the hell can he do that to me? How can he leave me on the road? So yeah, there was a pretty funny moment and I gave him a lot of flak after that. And you talked to him for like a couple days after that. I didn't speak to him. I couldn't believe me that he left me on the street and went back home. He actually reached home. I could not believe it. I was like okay fine, you should remember that your child's not sitting behind you, he just went home. So yeah, I didn't speak to him for two days. I hear you do a good impression of when Gaggen's brother got hit in the head and passed out playing cricket. It was so funny. Yeah, so we, a very good friend of mine, Eshant Sharma, he plays test cricket for India. So he's been a good friend of mine since he started playing for the state because I played with him, all age groups, everything and we play for the country together as well. So he was playing for his club against us in a game and I had played state cricket with him. So me and Gaggen's brother, we used to, we used to back together, we used to walk out to back together. So I told him and he never wore a helmet, right, like for protection on his head. And I told him, please wear a helmet, this guy is fast, he bowls fast. He's like, I'm not scared of anyone, and he was a good player to Gaggen's brother. So I knew he was a good player, I said, I know that but I played this guy, he's fast and he stole. So he can hurt you, he didn't listen to me. And the first bally bowl, he played it quite well, the second bally bowl, he bowled a ball which came towards his head and then he just went for a shot and it hit his head. So you know, sick people in India were something called a turban and then there's a smaller version which is like a cloth around their head. So he was wearing that, so he got hit on the head, I went to him and he was pretty fine about it. I went to him and was like, are you okay? And he's like, yeah I'm fine, don't worry about it, I'm all good, all good, he's not that quick. So the moment he turned around, Ashahn turned around to bowl again, in that whole process, I turned around and I don't see his brother anymore. And he's sitting by the empire on the other side, he lost total sense, he was nauseous, he kept swinging around and then he went and sat on the ground next to the empire. And we panicked, we laugh about it afterwards but we thought he's gone mad, you know, he got hit on the head and he just went and sat next to the empire and everyone's looking at him and then we had to take him to the hospital and then he had a few issues, then it got resolved but it was so funny. And I'm fine, but after 10 seconds, it's not even on the pitch, he's sitting there on the other side of the field just all by himself. So science and math, I understand where your favorite subjects in school. Who told you math was not for itself? No way, not the why not. So in math, we used to have exams and the maximum marks you could get in an exam was 100. I used to get three, I was that good. I did not understand why someone would even want to learn math. I mean, I could not understand the complications behind it. I mean, why do things have to be so, so difficult and I haven't used any of those formulas in my life till now. Cos theta, synth, I was like, what the hell is going on? Why would these things come together and produce this? How is it possible? I understood sport, I could never relate to math. It was like, I just wanted to get through my 10th grade exams because they used to happen at a state level. And then after that, you can choose whether you want to continue with math or not. I'm telling you, I've never worked hard even in cricket. The amount I worked hard to pass that exam so I can get rid of that subject. I promise you, I passed it and then I was like, I'm never looking in math again. How often would you have to miss school because you were at cricket tournament? Quite often, especially the higher grades. I think when I was younger, I didn't have so much cricket going on. But when I started playing for the under 19 Indian team, we started traveling abroad. So, five to six months of the year, I couldn't study at all. And then, as I said, with whatever learning power or the focus you had, you study for two, three months and then you did well in exams. I wouldn't say I was the most intelligent guys around, but I was smart enough to pick up things. And that would get me through grades, different classes. But the higher grades were much more difficult. How lucky was the timing of the national selectors arrival? Oh, that probably is the most crucial moment of my life, to be honest. So, I don't know if you've heard about the IPL, the Indian Premier League, which is the most famous cricket tournament in the world right now. So, we won the under 19 cricket World Cup in Malaysia in 2008. And I got picked in the IPL, which was the most fascinating sort of global viewership tournament in the world. And everyone's watching that and I got an opportunity to play. And I thought, man, this is my chance and I messed it up so bad. I was so bad in that first season of the IPL. And I thought, this is it, my life's done. I'm going back into the circuit and I have to do everything all over again. Then, luckily I got picked for the second 11, as I told you, the India A's, A team is what we call it. And we were touring Australia. And I was having a horrible series. Even there, I couldn't score any runs. And so, after a few games, another guy wasn't scoring runs. And the captain of the team said, why don't you give another chance to this guy? He's good. He's sitting outside. We know he hasn't done well. Just give him one chance and see. So, the coach asked me to play at a position I'd never played in my life, which was opening the innings. Like, you walk out to bat first. So, I said, I'll do it. I said, I just want to play. I was sick of sitting out and I was like, I'm going to do it. I just want to play. So, that game, we heard the chief selector of India who selects the senior team, is going to be here. And we bowled first. So, he didn't watch me bat. And he wasn't present, actually. So, when he came in, was the time I was walking out to bat. And I was so lucky. I was like, if we had batted first, he would never have seen. So, what I believe in is even now when I see someone play. If you look at someone play as opposed to hearing about someone, it's a totally different ball game. You can hear about people who do the same thing as anyone else. But you see someone else doing it in a way where you feel like, man, this guy is made for that level. So, I was walking out to bat and I scored a century. I got 120 runs. I didn't get out. I walked out. And he saw me bat. And he told the selector, this guy will go on to the next Indian team. The next Indian tour after having the worst time of my life. And I was like, man, my whole life changed there. He selected me. And I got a chance to play as well for the national team. And I was like, I felt so lucky that he could watch me play. And that impact was something that led him to selecting me. The West Delhi cricket academy. How would you best explain what that place is? That place for me is everything. That place for me. It taught me what I know today. It taught me the importance of discipline. It taught me the importance of companionship, playing as a team. So, whatever I learned in my life in terms of sport and that helped me in life as well, came from that academy. And I remember walking in the first day. And I was so excited. I got new clothes to wear, new kit and everything. And I just walked in. And because I used to play with people who were elder than me in my housing society. I walked in and I saw all these small kids practicing at one end. And then in the big guys, I saw a guy who was short. So, I started running towards that group. So, the coach is like, what are you doing? And I was like, that guy is just a little taller than me. So, I'm going there. I want to train with those guys. I know, but you are of this age group. I said, but these guys are too small. I can't train with them. So, then he was like, no, no, you need to train with them. And then I think in a couple of months, I was playing with the senior guys already. What do you think he allowed you to? So soon. Because that's not normal. Yeah, he didn't allow me on day one. Because that's the rule of the academy. I just walk in and just go wherever you want. But after a couple of months, he understood that I was ready to play with the seniors already. I was just not enjoying the competition that no offense, but that age group brought. Because I was already playing with the senior guys. So, I was ready to be more competitive and play against the big guys already. It actually kept making me stronger and stronger. And I used to come back thinking that I'm going to prove to these guys that they are doing the wrong thing with me. You know, in a fun way, but I used to be more motivated to perform. How would you explain the role that Raj Kumar plays in your life now? He's still my mentor. He's still a person that I speak to after every tour, before every tour. And he's always been a guiding influence in my life. And I'll always be very grateful to him because he's taught me everything I know. He pushed me in the right direction. He understood when to elevate me to the next level. As I just mentioned, pushing me into the seniors, all those kind of things. So, he understood my journey and my graph the best. Better than anyone else could have because I spent so much time at the academy and with him as well. What about him, do you fear? What about him, do I fear? Not many things now. But when I was younger, he would pull me up. And I was smacked a few times as well. And I used to fear that. I used to know that if I messed up, he's going to pull me up in front of everyone. Because he was a big believer of if you want to excel in sport, you can't have an ego. And he would smack me in front of everyone. He made sure that the teammates saw that if I did something wrong. And same with anyone else. How would that make you feel? That would make me feel angry because I felt like I was being embarrassed in front of people. But then now I understand the importance of it. Which was what? Because if you're not honest in front of your teammates, you can never be a team man. So if you're not exposed in front of your teammates, if you don't have the courage to say, I messed up and if someone else pulls you up for it, you feel angry because you didn't want to admit your mistake in front of people. Because that makes you feel inferior in some way. And when you're growing up, you have a lot of ego. You want to feel superior and you want to feel like you're the man. So when your ego is broken, you feel hurt. But then after a while you realize all you need to do is play for the team and that's it. Describe the importance of cricket in India. The importance of cricket in India is huge. There's a reason why this is not a sport. It's a religion in India because one, the kind of emotion it brings out. Cricket is one sport that everyone has played at some stage in their life in India. And that is why it's so special in people's hearts and minds and the kind of connect or the kind of ownership or the kind of frustration and emotion they feel with the players and with the team. It's a very organic thing. It's not made up. And I understand that because growing up and I used to watch games, I used to be involved in a way that nothing else would involve me. And I never understood why. Because I never played at that level. But still I would feel like I could have done this. And you know people actually feel like because they've played at some level, you know the guy shouldn't have done this. He should have done that. But that comes from a very pure source. 90% of cricket fans are apparently in the Indian subcontinent. I understand Bollywood will not release a movie during the seven week IPL season. To what extent do you think the IPL in India is similar to the NFL in America in terms of passion? It's huge. The IPL has become that one tournament where for two months people just look forward to it being eight in the evening. And they just sit together and watch. We as you know playing for one franchise, we watch other franchise play. And we get so excited watching the games and we get fascinated by it. And I can imagine people who are not even involved in the tournament. What entertainment it brings for them. So I think the potential is endless. I believe that IPL is just a platform for you to express your skills and to get better at what you're doing. Because it's so highly competitive. But I think the intention should always be to want to play for your country. How did you best explain cricket to an American audience that's generally unfamiliar with this work? I've heard a few American people have come to IPL and they've sat down the whole length of the game and tried to understand the game fully. Still they'll leave a bit confused. So I think it's basically if you look at, if you understand the basic essentials of the sport and just watch it for the entertainment or for you'll be very entertained and you'll be fine. But if you go into the finer details, as I said, you can really confuse yourself because there are a lot of terms that you wouldn't have heard of or you wouldn't understand what they are. Even when we watch baseball, the only thing I've worried about is the home run. And you know, just looking at people going mad. So it's basically if you just relate to the fun part of it, you can really enjoy watching the sport. Americans would probably be surprised to hear that you, as I mentioned earlier, you were once at bat for eight plus hours from thinking like December 2016, England. Tell about how that happens. It happens in a very different way. You have a lunch break, which is 40 minutes between play and then you come back and play again and then you have a tea break, which is 20 minutes between play. Why they call it test cricket is because it tests you physically and mentally over five days. It's not a thing that starts at one time, ends at one time and you get done with it and move on. This is a game that lasts five days. Yes, it does. I think the beautiful thing about that is and people find it so bizarre that how can one game, one match in a sport go on for five days. The basic concept behind it is test cricket for me is very similar to life. So if things don't go your way on day one, you have to go to sleep, you have to wake up and come back. There's no option of forgetting about it. There's no option of leaving it behind. There's no option of I don't want to do this anymore because if you don't turn up, you're left with ten men. And you're out of the team. So you have no option but to keep coming. Even if you do well, you have to wake up the next day, work hard all over again. You get a second chance to play and then you want to work hard or you have to work hard to do the same thing that you did on day one. And ups and downs through the game. Sometimes you're just batting for three hours, not scoring a run. And sometimes life is about that. Just being there, just hanging in there and then wait for your time and then capitalizing. So it teaches you so many things if you take it in the right way. And I'm so blessed and I'm so grateful that I'm able to play Test cricket for my country. It's taught me things that I could never imagine I could learn. What do you feel the commercialization of the game is hurting cricket? I think the more you commercialize the sport, the quality of the game will come down. That's what I strongly believe. And if you look at the number of games that we play now compared to 10 years back, it's a huge change. You would never imagine cricketers playing so many games throughout the year. And what happens is the quality will invariably go down. I've heard people say that there's too much cricket to watch sometimes and we just don't want to watch it. So it affects a lot of things. So if you have a tournament like a World Cup which is a global tournament and everyone's watching it, that brings interest. So I think the more impactful tournaments we have, and if the number of games on a regular basis come down and the more global tournaments where all teams are playing against each other, they increase. I think that's going to sustain the sport really well, not the number of games. In what ways would you say you're an aggressive batsman? Well, I've always liked to take control of the situation. I've always been a kind of a player who would walk into a situation and turn the situation towards the favor of my team. And that's why I think I'm an aggressive batsman because a lot of people would go in and they would be wary of the situation whether they want to attack or not. My game is totally counterattack. If I look at spaces in the field, I think of the fact that I can score runs here and I don't feel like I might get out. You have two ways of approaching your skill. Either you give into the opposition's plans and their mind games or you believe in yourself and say, everyone's looking at this as a pressure situation but I look at it as an opportunity. So I go in with that mindset and eight out of ten times it happens in a way that I'm able to counterattack. And explain the role that angles play. Angles play a huge role in terms of batsmanship as well. So basically what we have in cricket is we have the batting crease which is a line which traditionally you stand either side of the line. That's the normal setup of a batsman. But sometimes when if you're playing in the ball swings, it moves around. And the ball or balls the ball. So in baseball you don't have the ball moving around so much but in cricket you have a lot of variation with the ball where the ball has a seam stitched to it. So when it pitches on the surface it can go either way. It swings in the air because of the conditions, because of the shine on the ball. So there's so many variables that you need to counter and batting is about a split second of a decision. If I make the wrong decision, I sit outside in a clap all day. So the precision of that split second has to be so good and you have to keep countering it and keep being in the right mindset every ball of the game, every second of the game. It's tiring at the end of the day as well mentally. But to counter those kind of things, if you stand in your normal sort of traditional position, you have more chances of getting out. So sometimes you cut angles in a way that you stand in a different place to make the baller do something different. So those are the things that work really well in your favor in cricket. How does visualization help with that? It is everything for me. So if you're going to play an overseas tour, say to Australia or England or something like that, I literally sat down two or three months before and I've made a decision in my head that I'm going to take their best baller on. And when I train in the gym, when I'm practicing regularly, the visuals running in my head, me dominating that baller. When I train, I have music on, I'm putting myself in a situation where that guy is bringing the heat onto me and I'm countering that and you know, that becomes such a reality in your head. And invariably when I went into that situation, I ended up dominating that guy in their own home conditions. And what specifically are you seeing when you're visualizing? I'm actually seeing smashing that baller all over the field. So I actually feel that emotion in my heart and I can feel that this is going to happen. And you tune your head or you tune your mind in a way that it's so convincing in your mind that when you're in that situation, your body just takes over because it's already registered in your mind. And when that happens, you feel like, wow man, this is so powerful because if something looks difficult and if you don't convince yourself to go out there and achieve the opposite, you're never going to be able to do it. You can't just land in a place and say, I'll see what happens. That way your chances of succeeding become very, very low. And then you're first year in the IPL, you're playing with some of the best players in the world. Your coach Rajkumar said that your shortcoming was overconfidence. How so? It was. I lost my way. I drifted quite a bit and eventually I had the worst season I could have and I had discipline issues and I actually lost my way pretty badly. All this whole frenzy and this attention on me and suddenly playing with the biggest stars in the world. And they make you feel welcome, they make you feel friendly and you feel like I'm the man, you know, I'm everything and I can do anything I want. So yeah, I did lose my way and again, he pulled me up, he called me, he's like, you need to get your act right and. Is that what he said specifically? Yeah, he said, I've heard things and you need to be careful, you need to stay away from all this stuff that's been happening. And what was the stuff? Just being distracted, just partying, just not that focus, not focusing on my training, my diet, nothing. My graphs just kept going down and I didn't realize it. I was like, I got so carried away just wanting to be around these people and doing, you know, anything just to be socially accepted and, you know, just to be part of groups and wanting to hang out with cool people and stuff like that. And after that, I realized that I was heading into a totally wrong direction. And what ways do you think you struggled at times handling hecklers? Well, I've had many instances where I lost my cool with people who would sort of poke me or urge me to, you know, lose my temper. Like what would get to you the most? I think the stuff that would get to me the most was bad sledgeing. Like if someone, so sledgeing, I don't know if you know about sledgeing, sledgeing is basically. When you're playing on the field and people say nasty things to you just so you can get out and make you lose your focus. So when those kind of nasty things happen, I just lost my cool completely and people would get personal as well. A lot of the time they would get personal. And these are other players or spectators? Other players from other countries and I would only say, they would say stuff which was, this is the last time he's going to ever play for his country and you know, this is it and you're never going to see his face again. And those kind of nasty things and he felt like, yes, you want to get someone out but you can't, you can't snatch someone's life away from them by saying stuff like that. You know, it's if a young guy comes in and he actually believes in it, you could destroy his whole life. I can understand people, lose their temper and you know, they fight against each other, they swear at each other. But you don't wish that someone never comes back to play the sport that they've loved playing since they were kids. And those kind of things would rile me up and then the crowd plays a big role as well. The crowd riled me up as well a few times. And one time I flicked a finger, I flicked the middle finger at the crowd as well and it was so funny in Australia. I had enough of the crowd coming at me every time and you know, I would hear stuff which was so nasty and I was like, man, this is so bad. I never thought this is going to be the case playing cricket at the highest level. So I flicked the middle finger and then next day I come in the match referee, the guy who's in charge of the code of conduct. He gave you a pass. He called me into the office and he said, so what happened yesterday? And I said nothing. What happened? I said, nothing happened. It was all good. I was saying some things and I just went on with it. I didn't say anything and then boom, he drops this newspaper in front of me. I have a 14, 15 inch long picture of myself on the front page of an Australian newspaper with my middle finger right up there and was in my blood. Immediately I said, I'm sorry, I'm so sorry. I immediately accepted as I'm so sorry. Please don't ban me. I will never do this again. So he took half of my match referee away and then he warned me and then he was like, you should be careful, you're young, you don't want to spoil your career. But I kept learning with my mistakes. Why did an Australian newspaper call you the Donald Trump of World Sport? Yeah, a lot of nasty things happened back in the day. I think both sides were quite naive. I was quite naive to lose my temper. They were quite naive to form a judgment so quickly. We always think that our side of the story is right. So that's exactly what happened in that situation. They really took it to the next level and I was like, well, it is what it is and I've called it upon myself. What's your mom give you a locket and gold chain to help with your temper? Well, it's something, it's a seapull stone which is supposed to be calming and people in India believe in varying a lot of stones. It has a scientific meaning to it as well because of the elements of the stone and the magnetic field around us and how it impacts certain characteristics in us as well. So she gave me one saying this is going to help you with your temper. I don't know what extent it helped me to be honest. But the effort was certainly there but I kept losing my temper. Why do you think you've since had so much success in calming yourself down? Well, again, you learn. After a while you feel like you really don't have any competition, it's just all made up in your own head. And at the end of the day you're just competing with yourself. So my main focus now is to not disappoint myself first as a person and then impact the people immediately who are connected to me immediately. So they see if I have a downfall and things will become negative around me. So I've become more aware of my mistakes. I've become more aware of if I mess up at any time. I need to be the first one to correct it rather than someone having to come and say you're going down the wrong direction. So I think acceptance and awareness has certainly changed my life. Your dad's death. Explain the situation that led to him unexpectedly passing. The situation was so he used to do online shared trading. And that was something that became quite a big thing back then when in 2006 when he started doing it. And then as I said the business side of things wasn't doing well for my brother. The house was on rent and then his online shared trading account suddenly crashed. So one transaction went really bad and all the transactions that he'd done before that and whatever he had accumulated sort of went down in a go. So he really like he the amount of stress it brought on to him mentally was huge. So he had a stroke. He had a clot form in his brain. I didn't know it because I was playing my first season and I was at practice and I was coming back from practice. And I reached the house and then my cousin sister was there and I asked her where everyone is and she's like, you know this is gone for a regular check up. I was like, why would everyone in the house go for a regular check up? This doesn't seem right. Why is she the only one sitting at home? So I asked her where they are. She told me they had this place and I was like, take me there. So we went there. And then I saw him. And then I saw him, you know, in a situation that I'd never seen him before. And what was the situation? I mean because it was a stroke in the brain, he wasn't able to react in the normal manner. His body was moving in a funny way and he was not able to figure out where he is, like the way he looked at people as well. He lost total sense of what's going on. So I saw him like that and then it took him to the operation theatre and then it was a very difficult time because they did the operation. Then he came back home and then he was in rehab. But I saw him left side of his body, got paralyzed, left side. A vision also got compromised. And he was just not able to communicate that well even with the family members anymore. And you know couldn't do anything by himself. People had to pick him up and take him to the toilet and there he was, a self-made man. You know, he was just in the house if something went wrong. He wouldn't call anyone. He would just open the electric socket and just start fixing things himself. So he was that self-made and he wasn't dependent on anyone. So for a person like that to go through that, he couldn't handle it after a while and then eventually after a couple of weeks of rehab, he got a cardiac arrest. And you were there. I was playing a game and we were playing one of these four day games which used to happen at the first class level. And I was supposed to continue, resume batting the next day. And this happened around 2.30 or 3 in the morning and we all woke up and we had no idea what to do. And he was gone by the time we woke up and I literally saw him take his last breath in front of me. And I tried to pump his chest and all that and nothing worked. And then there were a few doctors in that area that we lived in. We went to their place. No one opened the door because it was 3 in the morning. We couldn't get any response and then we drove him to the hospital. But by the time they tried electric shocks and all those kind of things but nothing worked. He couldn't recover at all. So my sister and my brother and my mother, they all broke down and finally enough I couldn't cry at all. There was no emotion coming out of me and I just became blank. I couldn't register what just happened. Why do you think that was? No idea. Till date I couldn't understand. I was feeling like I was myself thinking why am I not able to cry. And then I think it was all building up inside me. So when we came back and everyone, all the relatives came in to sort of pay their condolences and stuff like that. And then I called my coach in the morning and I asked him or I told him what had happened. And then he asked me what do you want to do? I said I want to go and play. So he said are you sure? And I was like... He was you to game that day? Yeah and for me leaving a cricket match was something which was not acceptable regardless of what happened in life. Not going to a match was not an option I ever had or I couldn't register that option in my mind. So I said I'm going to go and he said okay if that's your decision go ahead. So I left the house. I hadn't cried at all. Nothing, no emotional. And my family was actually feeling a bit nervous looking at me because I was showing no emotion and everyone was like crying in their emotional. And then I went to the game and I picked up a friend of mine again and I told him what had happened. He thought I was joking. He didn't believe me. We kept going. We reached the stadium and when we reached the stadium and I sat in the change room and he told everyone what had happened. So when everyone came around me to tell me, we're sorry for you and that's the time I really broke down and you know that's the time all that emotion came out and I don't know why. The strangest part of the whole story to me was that night when you called your coach back and you were upset. He was surprised that you weren't upset about what he would have thought it was about. You were upset about your performance in the game. I was upset because I was the empire and the game made a wrong decision and he gave me out when I wasn't out. And I was upset because I couldn't be there till the end to make my team win the game. And I was really upset about that. So yeah, in the evening he was surprised to know that I was actually talking about that. Especially now, many years removed from having gone through that. How do you think your father's passing affected you? Now I feel like it was probably the most impactful thing that happened in my life because I remember that day I came back from the game. After I got out, I came back to do the cremation and all the rituals that follow. And I remember telling my brother specifically that I am going to play for my country and I am going to play this game at the highest level and there's nothing else in life that can distract me anymore. Because it was my father's vision as well. He wanted me to play at the highest level and he was really, really keen on me playing at the highest level as well. So I remember making that promise to my brother and then everything in life became second priority after that incident and cricket was the first priority. Yeah, it wasn't immediate that the success came after that, right? I mean, you kind of for a couple of your period of time started struggling in what ways did you begin to get careless off the field? The thing is that the incident happens in your life and then you move on with it. You don't know the kind of motivation it registers in your heart. I always knew that nothing else can distract me from achieving my goal. But the immediate distractions were too many. I'm traveling to other countries, going out regularly, having drinks with friends and just not being that focused. But the one thing that remained constant was every time I was down, every time I hit rock bottom, somehow I was able to put everything aside and say, right, I'm going to work hard and I'm going to get back up. So it's not like I made a promise that I'm never going to fall down. Obviously I was going to fall down. That's life. That is always going to happen in sport and life. But the ability to come back again and again made me realize that that incident was the one incident that helped me become mentally so strong that I could, even if I was distracted because I'm human, I will make mistakes. But the ability to come back up became so much more stronger. Right now I feel so grateful that I could get that strength from such a bad time in my life as well. How bad did the eating and training did? I remember I was not disciplined at all in terms of my eating and my fitness. I can't even relate to that guy anymore that I was in those years. You look like a different person. You see pictures of me. I myself feel like it's some other guy. So I played IPL from 2008, 9, 10, 11 and then 12. I was playing for India. I was playing for the national team at the highest level. But I hadn't got the success that some of the established players did. And IPL 2012 again had a really, really bad IPL season and my eating habits were horrible in that season. Very, very bad. And I remember coming back home and I came out of the shower, the team didn't do well. I came out of the shower. I looked at myself in the mirror and I was like, that's the time it hit me. And luckily everything that's been bad in me, somehow I get that calling myself that you need to get it right. Like the hardly anyone coming and telling me, you know, you're really messing up. It just comes from within. And then I saw myself in the mirror and I was like, you can't look like that if you're an international trickitor. I was like, how the hell are you going to continue like this if you don't take care of yourself? Boom. From next day onwards, I just changed everything about my diet. Hitting the gym two hours a day, just taking a day off in a week, eating proper lean food. I got away from all kinds of junk. I did not have a cheat day at all. And within eight to ten months, I lost about six or seven kgs. And then from then on, it became such an addiction because I saw the results on the field. I felt quicker. I felt lighter. I felt more focused. And then I was like, man, this is the path I want to work. What do you think it was about that moment that caused you by first thing the next morning to completely reorient yourself? Just the guilt, the shame of looking at myself and just feeling ashamed of myself that I could put myself in a position having played at such a high level and taking things for granted. I just could not register that in my mind anymore that I've been taking things for granted and not many people get this opportunity. So I can't sit around and just say, I'm going to do whatever I want and still expect to keep playing at this level. Someone else is going to take over. This is meant to be for me only if I work hard. It's not a given. So I always believe hard work is the only controllable I have. There was a period in which you cut out all distractions for a year and a half. What did that entail? I wanted to get back into the team so badly that that period, it was before all of this happened. This was when I played for the country and then I was left out. And for 13 months I wasn't selected again and then it became sort of a madness that I want to get back up. I want to get back into the team and then those those 13 months I was like, I was so focused. I was so focused that I want to get back. I want to get back into the team and my performances were such that the selectors could not ignore me after a while. So eventually I got my chance again and luckily I've never been out of the team since. Because it was around I think 2011 you said it dawned on you that if you wanted to be among the best players in the world you needed to do what a lot of people were not doing. Yeah, explain that. This was actually the end of 2011 2012 when we came back from Australia and I figured out the difference or the gap that we have with other countries. And I thought if we don't change the way we are playing or I don't change the way I am playing or the way I'm training or thinking or eating, I can never be among the best players in the world and there's no point in just competing if you don't want to be the best. So I wanted to be the best version of myself and then I based everything around that vision and then my training, my diet, my approach to was the game everything changed. And I know that I was in the most skilled sports person when I came in but the only thing that's been constant is working hard on myself and my game and that was the time I realized if the Indian team has to be the best team in the world we need to go ahead in a certain manner. What do you think you started believing in yourself more around then? Because I didn't feel that when I walked into play there was any kind of fear or respect in the opposition corner. So I felt like I don't want to walk into the field thinking or the opposition thinking or this is just a push over. Don't worry about this guy is going to do no damage to us and he's just playing just like another player in the team and stuff. I wanted to make an impact. I knew that I have the ability to make my team win and I wanted to be that version of myself where if I walk in I wanted teams to think like we need to get this guy out or else we're going to lose the game. So I thought if I can't have that impact on my team then I'm not doing justice to where I am and if I don't want to be that guy there's something wrong in my head. Either I've accepted being lower than what I should be or I just don't have enough drive in me so I said I'm going to lock my max potential and achieve what I should be. What about Novak Jokovic's body fat percentage motivated you? So he's about 7.5% or 8% I think. I got to 9.2 at one stage but that was the time we were playing T20 cricket which lasted 3 hours a game for 6-8 months and I got down to 9.2 but then we started playing this 5 day cricket and I felt like I've got no energy left after 2 days. I told my trainer you need to put on a bit more fat in your body to store it to be able to bat longer and go on in the games longer so then I started increasing a bit more fat and carbon taken my diet. But those things are motivating. You look at these guys you look at a Christian or a Naroa at the age he is right now and he's got what? In your big fan of his? I'm a huge fan of his. He's got 8% body fat at that age. That's ridiculous. That's just unbelievable. That shows you the commitment. He's a product of hard work and skill and that's what I believe in. He's not just a product of pure skill and no hard work and I absolutely admire people who work really hard. So how did you go about changing your diet? Well I figured out a lot of things myself. Things that felt right to eat and you know when you eat something whether it's healthy for you or not. So I never approached a nutritionist. I thought okay fine I know the things that are not healthy not good for you to eat and I'm going to figure my way out myself to lose weight first. And then I went so extreme that I had to meet someone because I got so lean at the end of it that you know I felt like there's something wrong I need to probably speak to someone and think of that. So what did you do that you saw laying? I kept eating boiled food. I kept eating stuff that had no oil. Nothing I was eating steamed vegetables and I got so so thin that I started feeling weak at the point. You know I got so mad about it but then I had to strike a right balance and then my trainer helped me to speak to someone and then get my diet right. So why vegetarian? Vegetarian because it was connected to a health issue so I was playing in South Africa early 2018 and I got issue in my neck. So my cervical spine had a couple of bulges coming out. They're hitting a nerve which went down my arm and I was getting really bad pain. I couldn't sleep for even 10-15 minutes at night. In one position I just have to wake up constantly. Did scans figured out there's a bulge coming out and it's hitting the nerves. I had to take medicines just to be able to sleep every night. And eventually I came back, got a few tests done. From this guy I know who does a lot of acupuncture treatments and stuff like that. So he told me that my stomach became so acidic that my calcium from my bones was being pulled out to make the stomach alkaline. So your stomach needs to be alkaline to function properly. If it's too acidic it just messes up your whole system and that was directly connected to the amount of meat I was consuming. So he said you need to change your diet. You need to make your diet less meat based because it's going to increase your acid levels in the body. And then eventually I was taking one calcium tablet a morning and that's not enough for the stomach to be alkaline. And I was having no alkaline drinks, nothing of that sort. And then I changed my whole diet from there. My bones were getting weaker, my bones were getting thinner and that's why with one impact a bulge came out. And then my physio told me eventually you'll have to cut it open and do a surgery and I was like I'm not going under the knife. I'm going to do anything else but get a surgery done till the time I'm playing. So yeah I just ate my whole diet overnight and I'm so glad that I did. It's the best decision I ever made. I have to change you. So in the World Cup just now that we played every game my energy was 120%. And my recovery was so fast I could like we travel the next day after every game after a full hecta game my average distance covered in a game was 15 kilometers. And I would just come back do my recovery treatments, travel the next day to another place. And as soon as we reached there I was ready to train again. And I just couldn't believe it. I was like I have so much energy I can do gym sessions in between. I can do 10 games in such a short span of time with each game at high intensity. And I never experienced anything like that before. I had no stiffness in my body. I had no niggles. I had no problems in recovering. No stomach issues, nothing at all. And I was off the area as well. You know raw dairy and meat. And I was like this is unbelievable. I could never imagine that changing my diet would help me in such a massive way. What do you eat in a normal day now? A normal day. So my meals are rice based. Really light steam rice. A lot of green vegetables, a lot of pulses that we get in India. A lot of what? So like lentils and pulses. So they're form of lentils. So that has quite a bit of protein and fiber and they're quite healthy to eat. So we eat in fertile eggs as well. And yeah it's just simple basic vegetarian food but a lot of greens and a lot of rice based meals. So the training, why did your trainer make you lift with only a stick basically for the first month and a half? He made me lift with a stick because he told me that firstly he asked me whether I wanted to get into powerlifting your cleans and your power snatch and all those kind of things and dead lifts and stuff. So I said yes of course I want to move on to the next level because I feel like you know it's becoming stagnant what I'm doing and it's not taking my game to the next level. So this is what comes with it. If you don't learn the technique, if you want to jump into it right now you'll snap a muscle and then you'll be out for a long time. The stick is so light it's annoying after a while to just keep going on to the stick because you feel like you just want to do something in the gym. But he said trust me the day I tell you to lift you'll see the difference. So I did it for a month and a half and the first time I did a lift was a 20 kg Olympic bar and 5 kg plates each side. So from 30 kg I went to 55 kg it was like a span of seven days. It was so quick because I knew the technique and then my body could take the load. And he said if you didn't know the technique you would have gone into the hospital right now because the movements are so tricky to do. But I'm so glad that I learned those fitness routines because I clearly remember the first time I did it. I was playing a game in Sri Lanka and I was feeling I was running behind a ball to stop it and I just felt so much power in my legs. I was like I got so amazed by the speed I was able to generate while in that movement. I surprised myself I was like it's all because of that training and then I got hooked on to it. How did it impact hitting the ball further? Well it just improved my power overall. So I was doing a few lifts before I would go and play. So I was literally game ready when I sat into the team bus. And I would just go on the field just have fun just jog around a little bit, no warm up nothing just stretch a little bit and I was ready and I experienced that I was hitting the ball about 15 meters further than I did before. Purely because my legs and my core became so strong without me knowing it and I just you get so much more confident because you feel like you can play the way you want because you can clear the boundary and you're not going to get out. So that's a totally different freedom altogether. How often are you in the gym now and what do the workouts until? They differ from in season to out of season. So in season for example in the World Cup just now I did very few lifts because when you're running so much the trainer believes in doing a lot of unilateral stuff just strengthening the muscles focusing on small muscle groups. When I came back now my routine is eight sessions of heavy proper power lifting. So and then they have few supplementary exercises on the days, alternate days. So I'm actually quite focused in terms of what I want to do even while we are setting up the stuff for another place we're moving into and the first thing I asked the architects was where can I put a gym in the house? What is the dimension like you know put them in touch with the trainer what are the machines that you want me to have in the house. Figure out the area do the dimensions give it to the people and all that process is happening so I'm very precise in terms of my training. So what are they going to put in? A whole lot of different things a few machines that have come in new a lifting platform for sure which I've been using for a while now. A few machines which are specific a glutein machine which works on your hamstrings really well. A couple of other machines which work on your calf muscles and then a lot of different things which like I'm getting the new treadmills which give you resistance training and you know the ability to sprint within your house. The impact that you have on on a field and stuff like that so yeah it's quite interesting to be involved in those things. The World Cup your reaction to the India's semifinal likes it. Well the reaction was obviously of heartbreak it was it's very difficult to process something like that immediately. It's only now that we've started to sort of get over it get past it but every morning we woke up thinking you know you got that feeling of the team bus is going to leave now to play the game. We should be heading to London to the next team hotel and start our practice every morning we woke up all of us and I would ask my teammates as well. Are you feeling the same way and they'll be like exactly that way you know you feel like it's you don't even register that it's done because it happens so suddenly and you've been involved in something for a month and a half and it just takes a bit of time to get over. What's the hardest part of getting over a loss like that? As I said the hardest part is afterwards on that particular day you can still look at the positive side of it but waking up the next few days is the toughest bit of it and everyone knows that everyone goes through the same thing. You know just a feeling of disbelief what about now. It's fine now because the World Cup's over as well but those few days still the finals was very very difficult to accept. Very very difficult to process because you know the tournament is still going on and you're not in it. That's a very different feeling. How exciting is the fact that India is going to be hosting the next World Cup? Oh it's amazing. I've experienced one before we won it in 2012 or 2011 and it was the most amazing. Although I was the youngest member of the team but I saw the whole frenzy around the competition and every airport we went every time we were checking into a flight security everyone just said you have to get the cup there is no other option you have to get the cup and I saw all these senior players you know just being calm about it and I was the youngest no one would tell me anything because I was just there in the team you know after everyone else but all these senior players I saw the pressure on them and then I felt like wow this is a whole different ball game so India is going to be very different yes. Such in Tendokar how would you explain how much you idolized him growing up? Well I used to it's funny when I got to play with him I all these memories of me watching him play on TV just came to me like in a moment. I remember growing up he was the one who revolutionized this sport in this country just purely because of the way he went on about things. You'll always have someone who will come and change this sport. So if you talk about basketball over Jordan the way he you know just change the whole outlook of the game and unlocked new abilities for people to believe in and that's exactly what he did before he came and people didn't believe that these things could be done but then he let the way and made people believe no these things can be done and he made the sport more exciting I remember I used to and that's you now. So that's the funny thing you realize that now that although in terms of skill in terms of the innovation in sport a lot of that is happening but I think my opportunity I've been presented with is to motivate people in another manner which is improving the culture of cricket and the way cricket should aspire to play for the country you know work hard on their fitness be disciplined take care of their diet take it to the absolute peak of professionalism because. In order to keep the standard of the sport going in the country and globally everyone needs to take responsibility so I think I'm contributing in that regard but what he did from pure skill point of view just the way he was able to bat was so much more different to anyone else and that just fascinated me I was like man this is so much more different and it was so captivating you just couldn't take your eyes off and he was batting and I used to get and I used to go to these shops and get my packet of chips and my. Nibbles and just sit in front of the TV to watch him bat and it was just pure joy. How true is it that you told your teachers back then that you were going to be the next such in Tendulkar? Well I'd you know few people who always question you you know you're practicing you're playing but what is actually your goal? So I used to tell them I want to be like such and I I'm going to one day play for my country and you know become this cricketer and they all used to find it like all fun and nice back then but even I didn't realize I was talking with absolute seriousness but one thing I remember was when I used to watch everyone like Indian team play. So there's so in cricket either you bat first or there's a score on the board and then you bat second and you try to achieve that. So it's the basic sort of nature of the sport so whenever the Indian team was batting second and they had to score more than what the opposition had already scored. Which means they're chasing. Chasing yes right you know the terms so and when they faltered I promise you I used to go to sleep thinking if I was in the Indian shirt I used to dream of it. If I was waiting that shirt and I was in that situation I could have done it and it's happened so many times in my career till now that I've been involved in a chase and I finished the game off and I don't know whether it was that conviction that formed in my head when I was that young that when I'm in that situation now everything just takes over so that's the power of mine. So the first time you see him in the dressing room he's in the corner you're sitting and staring at him for like 15 minutes set the scene in what you remember. So we entered the change room and everyone's busy organizing their stuff and I'm not bothered about my stuff I just let my bags be the way they were and I was just looking at him he's in the corner and you know I'm just observing whatever he's doing I mean think about it he's I've looked up to this guy for my whole life and then right now he's in front of me in the Indian team change room and I couldn't I couldn't sort of process that moment and then I'm looking at him organizing stuff he's like proper like precise about how he's doing. I'm just precise about how his stuff is going to be like how his bags are placed how his gloves pads bats everything is placed and going on about his work and then he looked up and you know he glanced at me and he gave me a smile because I just entered the team and he wanted to make me feel comfortable and I felt so embarrassed I had been looking at him so I just looked away and you know that sort of initial hesitation and but he was very welcoming and very warm and that's that's one thing that I really admire about him. What do you think you learned from him? I learned humility I learned absolute commitment to the sport and just after playing for 25 years for your country still having the commitment to you know put the effort that he put when he was on the field is something which I think is a huge huge learning for anyone not just in sport but I think across anything in life. 2013 West Indies Sachin's farewell test take me through what you recall and why you felt like you wanted to give him your dad's thread. Well it was obviously I mean we knew that this is his favorite series but till the time we got to Mumbai last test last game of the series last day of that game is the time that it hit everyone Sachin Tandoor Kurs not going to play for India ever again. Imagine for 25 years there's one name that's been constant in the Indian cricket team and now he's not going to be there we felt like you know how a child feels like when they're scared or they buy themselves at night you know walking home and you feel that sort of that hollow and that you know emptiness around you. We all of us felt like that because there was no one in the team that didn't look up to him all those people in the team were all young people and we all have looked up to him. So that was a very emotional thing for us to process but his emotion obviously was of a different level at that stage in front of his people you know going out like that the most the most amazing fair where I've ever seen and then I remember in the change room I just felt like you know. Just to pay respect I mean I thought there's nothing I could ever give him but to make him understand what impact he's had on me and how he's inspired me the most special thing I have is a thread you know we usually wear threads around our wrist in India a lot of people do so my father gave one to me which he used to have. So just to keep with me so I used to keep that with me in my bag and then I thought this is the most valuable thing I have so it's like my father gave this to me and I think I couldn't give you anything more valuable and I just want you to know how much you've inspired me and what you mean to all of us and this is my little gift to you. What sticks out to you from that moment giving it to him in his reaction? His reaction was of I think he understood what he's done for the young cricketers growing up in this country and I think it was a pure like if you if you told if someone came up to me tomorrow and said that I've impacted their life in a certain manner I would obviously get very emotional because I know where I come from and obviously he knows his life. He knows his whole life story and his journey you could never imagine as a child that one day someone's going to come and tell you you've impacted my life in such a massive way and I don't think there's anything bigger than him then having a positive impact on another human being apart from all your achievement apart from what you do in terms of numbers and all that stuff when someone comes and says you know I really appreciate the effort you put in my life and you help me at some stage and I'm really grateful for that. I've never felt gratitude more stronger than that. Anushka what people in the States would not know is that you guys are the celebrity it couple here and what's the name they have for you? Berushka Berushka. They combined Virat and Anushka they made it Berushka. How did you guys meet and how did you go about asking her out the first time? So we met at a commercial shoot for a shampoo and I remember my manager's a bunty he told me so you have this brand coming up and it was a known brand called Clear Shampoo and I was like great sounds good this sounds exciting and I was like who is it with? And then he's like it's with Anushka Sharma. I was like are you kidding me? You gotta be joking. He said no I'm serious I was like how the hell am I gonna be in a frame with a professional actor? I'm gonna look like a fool I have no idea how to do this and then he's like you'll be fine don't worry it's a nice script it's all fun in games and I was like okay fine and then the first time I met her I cracked a joke immediately you know with her. And then were you nervous? I was very nervous and that's why I cracked a joke because I didn't know what to do and you know I was I was standing on set and I was being all nervous and and she came in and I was like yeah just cracked a joke in front of her and then you were really sad? Yeah I remember what I said I was actually I thought I was being funny but I just said something which wasn't probably the right thing to say because she's tall as well and she was wearing she was being told that I'm not that tall I'm not like six feet plus or something like that and you must not wear like massive heels or anything. So she walked in with this much height of heels and and I saw her and she was looking taller than me and I was like didn't you get a higher pair of heels than this and she was like excuse me I was like no I'm just joking. So my joke actually became you know quite a weird moment for myself I was I behave like such a fool to be honest and she was so confident because you know she's she's on set regularly and I was just like how the how the hell am I gonna go through this but yeah it was a shoot that went to cross three days we shot at different times and then slowly she realized because she's also from a very similar background as me. So middle class families made it in their respective careers worked hard got to a certain stage so actually in hindsight when we look at our lives they were going at the same pace but in totally different worlds. The timelines of my debut August 2008 the timeline of her starting her first film shooting was 2008 August same year we you know came into the scene but we didn't know each other till 2013 we met and then our life has been so similar but in totally different worlds. And then we got along so well because we were talking real things and you know we were talking things that a lot of people don't connect with only if you've seen that life you will understand what we're talking about so the connect was there immediately and then we became good friends and then you know things went on from that which had you ask her out the first time. It was quite like very traditional you know we would go out for meals and you know we just spend time with each other and then eventually I mean you didn't really have to ask out I guess because both of us knew that we like spending time with each other and then yeah things I don't even actually remember any time when we thought of okay this is the transition that's happening it was so organic and natural. Things just kept getting stronger and stronger and stronger and then we knew that we just wanted to be with each other we're talking a bit about this in the car but what do you think you each have learned from one another. Well that's the one thing that people don't register and I don't think they register till date is that when you are with someone who's been at the same level as you in terms of being in the public eye understanding the pressures of situations they understand you so well and you can literally speak to them about whatever's going on in your mind because they know exactly what you're saying and similar for her as well. So the fact that we understood each other's situations the pressures the things that we were dealing with it just I mean we absolutely love spending time with each other and we just had such a strong connect and as as Gagan mentioned whoever meets us they immediately tell us you know we can feel your connection it's not even like we're wanting to present something in front of people but it's just organic it's a natural we're like we literally like you know each other's best friend. And we love hanging out with each other and the comfort of being able to share anything with your partner I think is the most amazing thing and we both learned different things from each other I learned a lot of you know things of acceptance things of working on myself things of you know just looking at the world in a different manner not being closed as a person and she's learned a lot from my life as well just you know in terms of motivating yourself working on yourself. So I think it's really hard on things and we've just kept learning of each other all the time how do you propose the basically the plan was all all executed by Nushka because I was in the middle of a series and she figured out the location and everything and she mentioned it pretty categorically that we have to keep it confidential and there was no other way around it. Did you guys want to Italy right yes but even then one of the media guys I think reached there but he wasn't allowed to. We didn't tell us until we landed in Florence. Yeah wow we landed in Florence we asked the driver where are we going is that I'm not supposed to tell you that nothing even them and you only had 42 people at the wedding so it was very private yes so this was the announce the announcement and you know we announced everything and everyone knew and there was like a frenzy and crop security and people had to get in with their cards and stuff like that otherwise you can't enter. So proper top level stuff and then we came to Bombay to do another celebration for her industry friends my cricketer friends and then two celebrations so across two celebrations after they ended the next day our family said we're so glad you did it in Italy because they had and we said imagine if the main thing happened in India it would have been madness they could not handle two celebration parties and then that's when they realize okay what they did was the right thing. So you're on your honeymoon in Finland tell about going to the coffee shop. I can't believe this I mean we go to Finland we were hoping to see the Northern Lights but we just could not because it was snowing for all three days and yeah just but we were just fascinated and just taken it back by the whole place it was pure like white and snow all over and so clean like it was literally no pollution. There was so you know so few people around and then we were like wow this place is stunning you know beautiful lodge then we went to a coffee shop one day and the city center was like feel like having a coffee it's so cold you know coffee would be fun. So we enter the place and I'm like okay this is one place in the world where we haven't seen anyone from India yet and this is amazing we're not getting you know noticed by anyone and this is pure freedom and suddenly I look around and I look you know in the corner of the coffee shop there's a there's a guy sick guy with a turban and I just looked away and then you know I just got my coffee I was trying to hide from him and I took my coffee went and sat on the table and I told him I saw this guy and she's like no way all the way in Finland I was like yeah and then that guy noticed us and he came to the table and then he said so good to see you guys my last name is also Kohli and I was like what are the things that I'm going to do. And I was like what are the chances of seeing one Indian guy all the way in Finland in his last name is the same as mine and I was like man when are we ever going to go to a place where we don't get noticed at all but yeah that was funny all the way in Finland where we didn't expect anyone to be there we saw what. So why in how a tweet you sent out in defense of your wife ends up being the most retweeted tweet for the entire year in the country of India. Well it was so ever since we played the World Cup in 2015 and you know we played a semifinal then as well and I got out I did not score many runs and my wife was there watching the game and for some reason people in our country love to blame women and apparently the reason why we lost was because she was sitting in the stadium and she brought bad luck it can get to that stage. A person who has no involvement in the game who is just watching supporting a husband and the country suddenly has the most adverse effect on a game and it started from there you know she was regularly being targeted and trolled and being pulled down whenever I didn't do well and we sensed a lot of insecurity because of her presence around the whole system. And then it got to a stage where again you know some incident happened and people started trolling her and you know all those kind of things happened and then we spoke and she was quite hurt by it and I thought well you know this has to stop at a certain stage and then I put out that tweet and then it got retweeted but the surprising thing was that it resumed again. I mean it was more like something drastic has happened where this guy stood up for something it's so good you know something good happens we believe in it for four or five days and then the next opportunity they do the same to her again so I mean we have actually been quite amazed and quite surprised to see so many people finding such pleasure out of pulling someone else down we never do that to anyone we have never done that to anyone we can't even register that and I think that's the negative side of so many things. So many social media that people find it difficult to process because so many people are just being happy at the expense of someone else which is so wrong. Same. How does your same in India impact your ability to lead a normal life? I don't think that I'm even expecting to lead a normal life in India anymore but the thing is that your priorities change over a period of time so basically you can't really go out and do normal things anymore you can't really say okay I'm going to just get into my car drive to a shop to a grocery store and just pick up some stuff and come back or you know what would happen if you did that. I'd probably not come back home or something like that I would not be allowed to leave and it's just that I don't blame people for coming towards someone but I think everyone should understand a sense of knowing that there is a limit to everything which unfortunately when you have a lot of people you know as I said it's not their fault they feel like I want to do my picture and that get done with it but if that is being said by two people around you then you have to wait for 200 to finish and it's never ending so it's very difficult for the person involved to actually draw the line and then invariably what you do you stop going to places which can potentially create that environment and as I said we don't have any aspirations to lead a normal life but you have to sort of confine your life in a way and then find joy and other things. If you're on the weekend then you decide you know I want to go downstairs and my apartment complex and go walk to the nearby store I mean that is an impossibility for you. Absolutely impossibility. In India no chance all we can do is so we have an apartment building now which has a little recreational area it's a small park and a pool area and a gym so all you can do is just go down sit there have a cup of coffee if you want but going out on the streets is absolute no no. Explain what royal jail is. So we speak about this a lot on tour so when we are playing games in India a royal jail is just being in a hotel and not being able to you know go out at all just being confined in the area okay there services there's everything but you go to the ground you come back you literally not stepping out of the hotel at all everything's taken care of but you just can't go out. So that's what we finally call royal jail because you are living a good life you are getting all the facilities but you just don't have the option of stepping out so I mean as I said it is what it is and you have to accept that situation. What do you love about the anonymity of overseas cricket tours. Well I love just being able to go out for walks just going to a cafe as you said just walking to a cafe and just sit there without being noticed and I actually you know at times there are people who so if I'm getting a haircut in a place and those people have no idea who I am and I'm just so happy just waiting there with everyone just waiting for my chance to get a cut and someone who recognize me will come in and say to the owners do you know who he is and I shot they don't need to know who he is and I shot they don't need to know who he is and I shot they don't need to know who he is and I shot they don't need to know who he is and I shot they don't need to know who he is and I shot they don't need to know who he is and I shot they don't need to know who he is and I shot they don't need to know who he is and I shot they don't need to know who he is and I shot they don't need to know who he is and and I'm going to have the kids do a nice job and I'm going to have a lot of free time and as you can see he was contexts to others and I just want to sorry I One didn't really get a you in stuff like that that's just what it did a normal person because at the end of the day, as a human being, that's what gives you pure joy. Just being able to walk out and just being able to be at the same level with everyone. Just talk to people for the pure organic process of just talking to a human being, not saying this guy is important so I'm going to speak to him. I love having random conversations with people if they don't know me and they start talking about something. That's the most beautiful thing because you're connecting at a level which has no judgment, no assumptions and because you're judged and assumed and presumed all the time, that to me is the most amazing thing to experience. When you're on tour in Australia or South Africa, explain why you'll try and avoid making any plans. Well, because, hey, you don't need to. You don't need to plan anything in particular. It's just the freedom of just being able to go out there and not having to think of, okay, I'm going to reach at this place at this time so you need to have security people ready for me and stuff. It's just so random and spontaneous and that's just to feel that freedom of, I can just pick up my headphones, just go out for a walk all by myself or just go out with my teammates, just chill, have a coffee, have a nice meal, go around the shops. I mean, I've actually roamed around the mall in South Africa all by myself for about two hours and I know this sounds like he's talking about something so strange, anyone can do it but for me to be able to do it all by myself was, I was revelation, I was like, I put my music on and I was just walking by myself, going from shop to shop, yes, people recognize me but there was one time I felt like I had no fear of people coming towards me or I'm going to be noticed or something like that and I've never felt so light in my life. All right, so the foundation, how did you go about deciding the direction you wanted ahead with it? So this started in 2012 is when the conversation started. We formed the foundation and then the announcement happened with one of those football games where we get a team of the Bollywood actors who play together in a side and they practice together against cricketers. So for people in India, that's like the most fascinating thing to see actors and cricketers in the same field together and just having fun and being friendly and you know, like you have those exhibition games where everyone plays and that brings in a lot of attention. So we announced it like that and then in time we started raising funds and we got to a stage where we thought of doing an athlete development program where we thought if we want to contribute in a larger way to the sporting community, it has to be spread across all sports. So then we started, we built a jury of people who select different athletes of a young group, a young age group from all kinds of sports, monitor their progress, see who are the potential people who can actually go up to the national level and then compete at a global level and hopefully achieve a lot more for the country and it just boosts the whole sporting culture. So we started to pick those people out and take care of their whole process from their fitness, from their requirements to literally like sponsoring them to help them in their journeys and it's been an amazing thing to be part of. When you see these guys succeeding and you follow their progress, you feel so, I wouldn't say proud but you feel so happy to see that you are able to contribute as I said to someone's journey when you understand the challenges that can occur, when you were growing up and you didn't have that much support around you to actually reach your potential but now if you see potential in someone to take them to that level and being able to help in that regard, I think for me is the most fortunate thing as a sportsman. I believe you are providing for 17 athletes right now in what ways do you support them? Any requirement they have from travel to sponsoring their equipment to fitness, to getting them in touch with the right people for their fitness routines and regimes and all this sort of stuff to getting them to speak to the coaches that they require, the kind of training that they need to do. Anything that is required in their journey to get to the stage that they want to get, so that whole process has been taken care of and we are also exposing them to understanding the commercial side of things as well to be able to communicate properly, to be able to speak with people in a manner, to be able to build your own brand in the process as well. I think all those kind of things because I never had education of how to build my brand or what should my approach be in life, how do I need to model myself or mold myself in a manner. But I think those social skills and the skills of understanding who you are as a person, as a sports person and what potentially you have commercially as well as in your skill is very, very important. Cricketers receive a lot more attention in India than in Olympian would receive. What would be your ultimate goal for how your support pays off? For me it's such an unfortunate thing to see because someone who takes the name of the country to that level on a global scale in the Olympics, they don't get treated in the right manner. And I think the concerned bodies should be providing a lot more for them than they do already. And it's not good to see someone just going down in life after they compete and they have no idea, no vision, no help from any other place. So my ultimate goal in life and that is our big plan in the pipeline in future as well to be able to create a space and environment, see more like a campus, a sports campus where I didn't have any idea of the rules of any other sport when I was growing up. I learnt because I was travelling so much. I learnt because I had exposure. The people who do not have exposure, they do not understand other sports. To become a total sporting nation and the culture to become even more stronger than it is right now, like you want to be able to go to every sport. You want to be able to watch a football game in the same vicinity and go watch a tennis match or a badminton match or you need to have keen interest in all kinds of things. So if my vision is to have a campus where all athletes can learn about each other's sport and then have that information spread out to their communities and eventually to the public and then everyone says we want to watch every sport and not just one sport. Thank you very much. Pleasure.